“BLACK THOUGHT IS A FEATHER brush of open switchblades,” Moten quips. “Show me how to do like you.” The “you” here—as with so much else within Moten’s oeuvre—seems specifically Black; Moten builds on self-consciously Black traditions, from post-Coltrane jazz to post-Black Arts Movement thinkers to Frank Wilderson’s and Jared Sexton’s Afro-pessimism, whose arguments underpin Moten’s “Black Op” (his term) of black optimism, lived outside or beyond the white supremacist categories of modern social life. (That said, nonblack artists and thinkers feature in All That Beauty too. Leonard, for example, and the Polish philosopher Roman Ingarden.) “You can be human by yourself but black don’t go it alone. It’s a social dance, unruliness counterpoised between riot and choir.… We study staying unburied in the common underground.” Those sentences from an essay (“Amuse Bouche”) that Moten published in a book of prose come very close to the aims and sounds here. For “the body” in Moten is a collective body, beyond any poet’s singular self. Beyond, however, does not mean separated from: Moten’s idea, Moten’s goals, and Moten’s style can make this book itself feel uncommonly singular, uncommonly alive—more than a project, less than a single story.

Such sensuous embodiment is everywhere implicit in the musical thought and “long black sentences” of Moten’s All that Beauty. Emmalea Russo’s terrific Wave Archive takes the poet’s own body as the explicit theme of its clusters of prose and verse and occasional images. That body, and its brain, have been shaped by Russo’s epilepsy, with its “auratic prodromes” and “tonic-clonic seizures”:

The body is rigid.
The body is the whole grid.
The body is good riddance.
The body is rid
and not under
your control

and will fall

has fallen

in fact

to the ground.

Russo calls her epilepsy “my greatest school and teacher,” and the book arranges into art the things she has learned, along many axes of puns, triple meanings, incorporated photographs, quotations from scientific and medical literature (describing epilepsy in clinical terms), and original aphorisms. Expository where Moten is mimetic and exemplary, yet no less concerned with how to chart a way—if not a narrative—through the world, Wave Archive explains what seizures are and what they do to the brain; some sections are indexes (a device also used, inter alia, by Ander Monson and Rebecca Lindenberg). “You like to read via the index,” Russo comments, “because it’s neither hierarchical nor chronological / and this feels better in your body.” The same might be said of the book’s internal cross-references, which turn out to offer another way of unifying a book-length poem. Such devices trade not merely on stylistic continuity, but on the habits of an attentive reader, who can’t wait to turn back to page 12 from page 40, only to find that page 12 points ahead to page 113.

Wave Archive also depicts, and explains, Russo’s own work as a visual and performance artist (she also practices astrology, writing a column for Cosmopolitan: yet another creatively fertile, intuitive way to understand the elements and the skies). Several passages show Russo sculpting a pillow, boxing it up, then setting it out to sea:

You would like to number your feelings… The emotional
      archive is your only boat.

Now that you’re in the ocean, looking at the compartment
      from the other side, you’re confused.

Epilepsy is like being put in a box and cast on a turbulent ocean, whose waves are brainwaves. Adrift on the sea of herself, Russo must figure out how to stay afloat, and whether she can get back to terra firma. Complicating matters further is that, unlike a real sea voyager, an epileptic may find herself transported at any time:

you go lustrous on the train you’re all skin and bones
folded on the floor specked with silver flakes absent

from anything

ocean ready land and sea shh shh
your pretty mood you are a thimble of this curious land